One of the reasons I wanted to come in
and talk to you was because I want to
just talk freely.
How does that all feel for you
personally? That thought that one week
earlier we could have saved 21,000
lives.
There were some mistakes that we made in
terms of the measures.
Yeah.
How they were brought in. Well, now you
see Stephen, you're getting into gotcha
questions.
No, I genuinely
just all total rubber. I'm not I've not
even asked the question yet. There needs
to be boundaries. You have to get
No, no. Those rules
Yeah.
were not in place. Can I ask the
question?
You can ask a question.
I'm going to ask a question.
This bit is really hard for me.
People say you you were a contradiction.
Yeah.
What's your response to that?
Could you do me a quick favor? If you're
listening to this, please hit the follow
or subscribe button. It helps more than
you know. And we invite subscribers in
every month to watch the show in person.
When I started the D CEO, I wanted to
create a platform where we get to see
behind the scenes, where we get the
truth, where we get the context. That is
at least my attempt. The rest of it is
up to the viewer to decide what they
make of the conversation and what they
take from the conversation. And the same
applies to this episode. So without
further ado, I'm Steven Bartlett and
this is the D of CEO. I hope nobody's
listening, but if you are, then please
keep this to yourself.
[Music]
Matt, I was really really keen to have
you come and join me in my in my kitchen
here in in London to talk in a long form
way about a ton of different things that
are front of mind for you that have gone
on over the last couple of years. I
think you know usually and you've
listened to this podcast before so you
know I typically start about with
childhood and all those things which I
will get on to but the question that was
really front of mind for me and I think
will be for a lot of people is
why did you want to have this
conversation here? Hm. Well, I love your
podcast.
One of the reasons I love it is cuz I
think what you managed to do is you
managed to get people to be really um
really honest about themselves. Right.
One of the things I admire about the
podcast is that um it's important that
we have a space where people can talk
about where things go well and where
people have failed and what they've
learned from that. and you're so um sort
of brutally honest with yourself about
it and you really put that on the line
and that in turn gets it out of other
people
and you know I've been through this um
extraordinary experience of being the
health secretary in the pandemic.
There's a lot of you know things that
I've learned through that and learned
about myself. Um and I I want to be able
to articulate how I saw it if you like.
I just think that you're it's just one
of the most self-aware podcasts that
I've I' I've listened to and I now I'm
completely hooked.
Oh, so let's start then. I was brought
up in a happy, loving, complicated
modern family.
Yeah.
Explain.
And why why complicated?
Well, complicated because my parents
separated when I was two and I
effectively grew up with four parents.
So the both of them happily remarried
before I can really remember. So it was
complicated in the way that lots of
modern families are complicated and I
have I have a half brother. I have step
brothers and sisters but it was also it
was also very it was very loving and
every you know I got that that love and
support from from four parents rather
than the normal two.
What were you like in school?
Well, one of the biggest things that
happened to me was that I I after
primary school, primary school is in
this lovely um very rural cheshure uh
primary school, a very very uh
straightforward, small uh warm. And then
at the age of 10, they put me in for the
or I was asked if I wanted to put go in
for the exam for the local independent
school a year early. This was the
probably one of the biggest things that
happened in my childhood because you
know I went and did the exam and I got
through and I went to school. So I went
to secondary school a year early.
Suddenly I went from being finding it
all pretty straightforward to really
having to struggle to keep up, really
having to work hard and both socially
and academically suddenly I was in this,
you know, I was in with a group of big
group of people who were all a year
ahead of me. And combine that with my
sort of my mother's work work ethic.
You know, she started her own business
and worked incredibly hard
and um you know that had a it had a it
had a big impact on me.
In what way?
Specifically on the social side. You
said you were socially struggling to
keep up. Were you bullied?
Um
a bit. I wouldn't say that was the ma
that was the main thing but I was but
yeah people it was tough. People were
tough on me. Um, and um, and I'm also
quite sort of, you know, self-confident
and exuberant and that sometimes has
robbed people up the wrong way,
especially when you're the little guy at
school. So, I think, you know, that so
that I'm I'm sure that part of the sort
of the drive that I have comes from the
fact that I found myself age 10 suddenly
in a very, you know, a tough
environment. And you you ultimately must
have done pretty well in that secondary
school where you were trying to fit in
because you went to Oxford which is just
Yeah. So I went to Oxford a year early
you know so I was
you went to got into secondary school
year early.
Exactly.
And you studied politics, philosophy and
e economics, right? Which is
a lot of a lot of people that go on to
become politicians study study that
course. That seems to be almost like a
bit of a right of passage to
politics in a way because you've got you
know people like is it Ed Milliban,
David Cameron, Jeremy Hunt that have all
studied that.
The list goes on. Michael Ed,
right?
Um,
Ed.
Yeah. So, one of the things that as
being a bit of a a like a I guess
there's two questions here. The first is
why did you choose politics?
I I thought it would just I thought it
was the most interesting thing to do. I
actually got into it through the
economics. So, I did I I studied
economics A level cuz I was really
interested in business.
Right. And what what happened was this
that um when I was a teenager in the
early '9s,
my mom's business nearly went bust and
we had a moment when we had this uh our
major client themselves was struggling
in the recession in the early '90s and
couldn't pay their bills. So, it was a
classic late payment cash crunch for a
small business. We knew that if we
didn't get this check
by the end of the week, then the company
was was going under. Eventually on the
Wednesday or the Thursday, the check
arrived and the business was saved and
it went on to to prosper. But that made
me ask this question, you know, how come
a perfectly good business employing a
load of people who are working
incredibly hard, how can that go bust or
be at risk of going bust for something
completely outside of their control? And
the sort of sense of injustice in that
made me then ask how does the economy
work? And that's what led me to to take
an interest in economics which I had a
real affinity with. I loved it as an A
levels subject and that so that's what
led me to to um to PPE at
at that age say like 18 1920. Yeah.
Were you were you aspiring to become a
politician?
No I was inspir aspiring to become an
entrepreneur.
So I actually I almost did economics and
management at Oxford and then somebody
told me it was easier to get into PPE
than economics and management. So and
that sounded close enough to what I
wanted to do.
So that's why I ended up doing it. Is
there not because because when I because
people have said to me, you know, I've
had business success and all these
things. I've built a platform. People
say have suggested, "Oh, maybe you
should go into politics, Steve." And the
thing that scares the life out of me is
it's like a lose-lose game. People are
going to [__] hate you regardless of
what you do. So I I I sometimes wonder
like who are these people that like
want to be politicians?
So Well, thanks. Um the um but it's
true, right? And my my experience as
health secretary is is you get you know
some people uh are some people love you
and some people hate you, right? I was I
was on the tube and I never know what
that what what how it's going to be when
they come up and see me. So I was on the
tube last night um and some enormous guy
in a heavy metal t-shirt, long hair
comes up to me and I'm like how's this
going to go?
And he said I just want to say thanks. I
got my vaccines because of you and I'll
never forget it. I was like, "Oh, well,
that won't that could have got worse."
And and so and so you you know and and
obviously not every interaction is um is
as cheerful to put it diplomatically.
And so in a way, you know, that is part
of it. You know that if you're going to
make a big decision that affects lots of
people's lives, some people are going to
like it and some people aren't. Um that
isn't what got me into politics. What
got me into politics was the observation
that that's where the big decisions are
made. And quite rightly in a democracy,
you know, the big calls in economics to
stop other people going through the same
experience that I did as an early
teenager with my parents' business where
it almost went bust for something
completely outside their control. And
that and that and that's what drove me.
And the combination of the interest and
you know because it's very interesting
politics
and the mission uh got me there. Um so
one of the things that has also always
leveled at the like political system in
our country is that and you kind of see
this from you know you studied politics
philosophy and economics at Oxford is
that a lot of the people that do go on
to make those big decisions as you've
described.
Yeah.
They come from like privilege.
Right.
Right. And even you know you you know
your parents went through a tough time
but living in Cheshire is
I'd rather live there than Moside.
Right.
It's it's a it's a privileged place to
to grow up and to live and going into an
independent school. you went to Kings
King School Chester King School in
Chester as well, which is a privileged
place to come from. So, one of the
things that I've always contended with
and is, you know, and honestly, one of
the things that actually quite quite
honestly put me off ever going into
politics was this prospect that it's
kind of this elitist club where they all
come from Oxford and and then the
problem you have with that, if that is
true, right, is
that the decisions then that are made
for all of us are made from people that
have walked different set of foot
pathways, right?
Okay. So, I think there's a few bits.
Let's park the Oxford point because
actually if we get if Oxford and
Cambridge and the other top universities
get it right
then actually they are great um
meritocratic levelers because the thing
that Oxford really did for me not only
taught me how to read and write but it
also it took a provincial boy from
Cheshure
and put him into exactly the group that
you describe. Right. So I was from a
very much a middle class background. But
if those the the top universities get
their their selection right, who they
choose and if they get the the support
right so that people from your sort of
background feel encouraged and drawn
towards them and then supported once you
get there then they can be great
levelers. Okay. So so but let's park the
sort of Oxbridge debate because that's a
sort of uh you know that debate will go
on for as long as those universities are
preeminent I imagine. I think the most
important thing in politics is where
where you're going and what you're
trying to achieve and one of the most
important skills that I think is
incredibly hard to communicate in
politics but is vital to doing the job
well is empathy.
Right? And you can't
walk other people's um uh shoes except
through empathy and and you the lived
experience of a particular background is
incredibly important and I'm I'm a you
know I'm a big fan of welcoming people
trying to get people into politics from
all sorts of backgrounds. So I'm not
disagreeing with your critique. The
point is each and every one of us has
our own background. The way that you can
try to get over the problem that you
describe is through empathy and that's
and that's incredibly important.
I can't have empathy for what it's like
to be a woman, for example, because I've
never been one.
No, that's not true. You can have
empathy for it,
but not but sorry. I can have empathy,
but I I I I believe that empathy comes
real real true empathy for someone else
comes from understanding the pain or
struggle or situation they're going
through.
And I can never truly understand the
pain or struggle that say for example a
woman facing discrimination when she's
trying to raise money
is going through because I have never
experienced that. So I can guess what it
might feel like. It's like almost like
the topic of racism, I think. Like no
one can know. I don't know how a white
male politician that's gone to Oxford
will know what it's like to be called
the n-word on the playground when I was
11 and how that made me feel like the
feelings of shame and being different
that I then went on to feel. Yeah.
So, so I I I tend to believe that the
the way we create a truly empathetic
political system is by finding a way to
get people in. I've come from like low
economic housing and different
backgrounds and minorities. So when I
look at the political landscape and I
see that a lot of, you know, a lot of
people have come through a very like too
many people have come through a very
privileged background, it makes me think
that the decisions that are going to go
on to be made will lack that true
understanding of what it's like to grow
up in a house that is like damp and
moldy and there's rats and stuff.
So there's there's I'm grinning because
there's two ways to answer this, right?
But the thing that's absolutely
screaming at me to say to you is that is
why you should go into politics.
But I feel like I can't get in because
because
of course you can get in. You'd be you'd
be I I'll sign you up now. It depends on
which party you want to join. That's uh
I can only speak for one of them. But
but go for it. So firstly, that's my
actual response. But the other thing is
it's it is wrong to say that you cannot
um uh that you can't empathize with with
others and others situations. You can't
have lived somebody else's life,
but you can seek to try to um to
understand where they're coming from.
And and I certainly do that. And you
know, that's part of representing a
constituency. I think it's actually
really hard to communicate in politics.
uh this this the empathy point because
it's really easy to generalize um and
and it comes down to the fact that if
you poll people, right, most people
think that politicians are useless, but
when you name a politician, they tend to
think that they're their local person,
their local MP, they tend to think that
they're great, right? So there's a gap
between what people think of politicians
as a whole and think of individuals who
they've interacted with.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah, I think I think I
think I can def defin definitely emp
empathize with pain and suffering and
all of those things. I just think in
order to create a truly like
representative political system, sure,
it needs to be full of people who have
actually gone through those things as
opposed to, you know,
I think the thing that's always put me
off is because when I heard about this
like, you know, everyone's come, you
know, a lot of politicians have come
from a certain background and then you
see how promotions and stuff are done.
It makes me think that it's a bit of
like a, you know, a system where we're
we're promoting our friends and bringing
them up and if they've gone to Oxbridge
and I went, you know, I studied with
them, I'll I'll promote them when I get
there. So I want it's always felt to me
like running would be very very very
difficult um because I didn't go I don't
come from that sort of privileged
Oxbridge like typically quite boys club
place. That's how it feels right for me.
So I might be wrong. I think I I I
really think you're wrong because I
think actually the system in a way um uh
because of this problem
um the system is actually tries to draw
people through faster.
Um
is it doing a good enough job?
Uh I mean look at actually um give him
his credit, you know, look at who Boris
Johnson has put in his cabinet, right?
And um I know that you're immediately
thinking of people he was at the same
school and university as. Right. Um but
there are an awful lot of people who
weren't. Right. And I don't want to go
through the individual backstory of you
know the guy who arrived age nine from
uh Kurdistan with only a his dad with
only a pound in his pocket. Yeah.
Right. um Saja Javid who grew up in one
of the poorest streets in Bristol and
made it uh from there and by the way
who's from a family of amazing amazing
uh men um his I think he's got four
brothers there's five of them um uh
Rishi Sunnak right he grew up in a his
his mum's a pharmacist he grew up in a
pharmacy right there are there are loads
of people who have made it from
difficult backgrounds and and actually
I'm sad that you have the impression
that that you do cuz it's not really my
experience of uh of of being there.
So you you you make the decision then to
move towards politics. You become
eventually George Osborne's chief of
staff in 200
2005ish. Yeah. And in 2010 you became
the MP for Midsuffk.
West SuffK.
West Suffuk. Okay.
Right. And that that was your
I guess your your entry into politics.
Yeah.
Moving forward then you you you know you
get promoted a few times and then
Theresa May comes in and
demotes you.
Yeah. Yeah.
So she demoted you to Minister of State
of Dig digital culture.
Digital and culture. And God that was a
brilliant job. I mean so
why did she demote you?
She demoted me because they decided they
wanted a uh a clean break from the
Cameron Osborne years.
She didn't like George Osbor George.
Well, she fired him pretty brutally and
I was just, you know, head below the
parapet enough to get through and she
demoted me. I was I was attending the
cabinet at the time and um she I I
remember the meeting it was um they had
told the press that they were going to
fire people until 11:00 a.m. and then
start hiring people. And I was asked to
go and see her at 10:50. So I thought,
"Oh, this isn't going to go very well."
I walked in and I was she'd been running
about 15 minutes late. So I walk in and
there's a clock on the wall in her
housecom's office and it says 11:05 and
I said oh it's gone 11 so I guess this
is going to be okay and because I
thought well you know at least make a
laugh if she's going to be firing me you
know why why make it unpleasant and uh
she said well that depends how you react
because um I uh there isn't a a space
for you in my cabinet uh but I know
you're really interested in digital and
that's one of the big things that's
going on in the
Uh, so would you like to be the uh the
number two uh in DCMS and uh and and be
responsible for digital policy and just
keep your head down and and sort and um
and sort that out? And I I leapt at it.
It was absolutely wonderful.
This is maybe a bit of my political
naivity, but when I when I was reading
through that you'd be you'd been the
minister for like digital business,
enterprise, energy, and ultimately
health.
Yeah. How can one person know anything
about any of that stuff? How can anyone
be a master of like five, six different
things?
Yeah, because that's not the job. So, um
it's not the job to be the master in a
way. It's the job to be the people's
representative amongst the experts. So,
your job as the minister is to be able
to be the representative of the people
who is responsible for the direction of
that policy area. and you have endless
experts. Your job is not to be an
expert. It's to listen to the experts
and then decide democratically what
direction do we want to go. So take I
mean an area that I do know you know I I
did have a background in take on um the
future of the internet and um
what was your background in that? uh
well only that I I you know I can code
and I understand a bit of um about
technology
but the big question was how do you keep
children safe online
right and how you make take the internet
from a sort of a wild west
and social media to a place where people
have more protection you know is it that
was the the the you know most important
question in that area at the time and
for that yes you need experts but you
also need a you basically You need a
view of where you want to get to. It's a
it's a it's you want to you you need to
set the mission and the direction. It's
leadership that's needed.
My background is social media and I
actually whenever I see like the social
media policies being set, I always the
the debate we have in social media and
digital is like who is it that's making
these decisions because the people we
see
when we obviously the spokespeople as
you've described
Yeah.
we know that they don't know it like us.
So we think that we we we we pray that
the decisions aren't made poorly. So
let's take cuz that can be the subject
we use to describe all of these
industries that you've you've led as
minister. So
as it relates to say social media when
you're trying to understand what
policies to set for children to keep
them safe.
Yeah.
You're telling me there's this like
group of experts behind the scenes who
are discussing and feeding information
and then your role to play is in
deciding
Yeah. on the trade-offs.
The trade-offs, right? Which would which
needs expertise to know what the
trade-offs are.
Yeah. Yeah.
Um and then also and communicating them
communicating it to the public. Yeah.
Understanding what the public is
expecting because sometimes experts can
get so close to their subject matter
that you got to be like yeah but there's
you know there's 60 million people over
there who aren't experts and they need
the voice in the room as well.
You're ultimately the person when you're
in charge of digital that is making
these calls. So you speak to the experts
then make the calls. My my thing is on a
topic like digital the harm that can be
done if someone doesn't understand that
area of expertise because ultimately the
minister makes the call you can like
destroy an industry [__] an like
[__] an economy so I've always
thought that the person making the call
should be
should be really experienced in that
subject matter and that doesn't seem to
be the case because of the design of the
political system
because of democracy ste it's democracy
and that's good and right because when
you have technocratic government you can
you just get you know experts are so
focused on their area
that sometimes they just don't see the
big picture.
So you're saying you need that impartial
kind of outsider to
Yeah, that's what that's what I tried to
be as a as a as a minister. Um, and also
so it's about lifting people's eyes to
the to the the you know the big social
trade-offs. And I mean that in the best
sense that you know the trade-offs
within society um how free to be versus
uh how safe to be in the in the
internet. It's an absolute classic of
political philosophy right and um people
have been worrying about that question
in the offline world for 300 years. and
we were bringing that sort of approach
um into the online world as opposed to
just leaving it as a completely
libertarian space. Um but the the job is
to is to synthesize the expert view but
not just not just follow it because
the experts can become so focused but
also they can't sometimes provide the
leadership
right to say we we're going over there
and and you know like yes of course
we're going to take on um Facebook over
some of the harmful content. Yeah, of
course we are. We're not just going to
lie down and say that they can make the
rules up.
It's interesting because when I see the
political debates with things like
Facebook, a lot of the government
officials both here and in the US
haven't got a [__] clue what Facebook
is. And you can see them asking Mark
Zuckerberg the most dumb, naive
questions about the platform. And then
as an outsider watching, yeah, that
these people that don't understand what
they're talking about are ultimately
going to be writing the legislation as
someone that works in the industry and
could actually tell you what in my view
having worked in the industry for 10
years deep in it.
Yeah. that fully understands things like
the Cambridge Analytica scandal and data
data privacy and really also understands
the context of the media pressure which
is sometimes
uh comes doesn't come is agenda based
um and and I I worry
so getting right so getting a rational
solution out of that bundle of problems
yeah
is not easy
yeah so what would you it kind of is
but it is dem but it but it is
democratic to ensure that somebody who
is who represents
um represents people
is ultimately making the decision but if
they're any good they'll listen to the
advice that you get.
I think I think my view is that they
should represent the people for sure and
I think that spokesman role in
leadership is incred incredibly
important but I also feel like they
should h like have deep understanding of
the nuance and complexity and have
experience in the thing which kind of
brings me on to you became in charge of
health as well the health minister which
is obviously something not in your
wheelhouse.
No. So I'm I'm a um doctors ask me you
know why should a non-d doctor yeah be
responsible for the health service. Now
two answers to that first is well it's
pretty arrogant of doctors to say it
should be a doctor what about a nurse
right because there's more nurses in the
NHS than doctors park that minor local
issue right the reason is cuz I am there
as the representative not just of those
who work in the health service but of
the people who use the health service
which is to say all of us. And so I
think actually it's better for the
health secretary to essentially be
somebody who is a who is there on the
side of the patients.
You of course you listen to the the
clinical advice you know and some of the
most amazing brains in the world right
like like Chris Witty Jonathan Vanam
these people are amazing wonderful
communicators very shrewd advisers
ultimately it's right that the person
taking the decisions is representing the
people through the democratic process we
have
um and not representing the uh the
producers if you like that is a that is
a better way of structuring it.
You think you you believe that?
I really do.
I mean I look I I don't know these
issues deeply enough to to know the full
complexities and this is maybe even
proving my point that I don't understand
the nuance of politics. So I can't
actually say if that's a better or worse
system. One would assert though that the
best solution might be to have someone
who understands the side of the patient
because they are one. We're all humans.
We all live in this society. So we use
the NHS. That gives me a little bit of
empathy as to the the you know the the
the system from a patient's perspective
but also someone that understands health
and and the nuances of that. Maybe
that's spent the last 10 or 20 years as
you know working within the industry and
can understand those layers you know
more than someone who was working in
digital 5 minutes ago can. It's just an
observation as like a naive outsider
like why do people that don't have
experience in a subject matter become
the minister for it? Yeah, it's quite a
common um it's it's quite a common
critique of politics.
Um and different countries deal with it
different ways, right? So some countries
the entire cabinet is made up of people
who aren't in parliament. Um like you
know the US cabinet is made up of people
who who have to by law not be in the
Senate or the House of Representatives.
But then you get even more of a divide
between the sort of political and and
the democratic over here and the
essentially technocratic over there.
Actually, I think that our system is
better than the US system because it's
because these two things are emerged
together. Um because you do you get in
taking these decisions, you get
incredible um advice. You get access to,
you know, the all the industry experts
that you want to talk to and and
ultimately you're making, you know,
you're making balanced judgments. The
way the UK does it as well is the civil
service will never put forward a
proposal that they don't think is
workable. That's the that's the deal,
right? So you do have these long-term uh
experts who have been in in the field um
and they will uh they'll say okay this
is where the way I I tried to do it was
I'd say this is where I think we need to
get to how should we best get there and
then the experts will come up with a
plan of how to get there uh and you know
you might have a view on some of the
details of that but essentially I saw my
job as saying this is the mission and
then communicating how we get there and
then being advised on the way from A to
B because the the thing you lose if you
go for your model is you lose the
democratic input and um and and that can
lead to things going wrong.
In 2019 you when Theresa May stepped
down, you ran to be the next prime
minister or at least to lead the party,
right?
Well,
and that would lead you to being the
prime minister.
Yeah.
Um
why did you want to be the prime
minister?
Because I thought that there was a need
for a complete fresh start.
Did you think you'd win?
No.
I'm extra honest. Yeah.
No, but I I had fun trying. Um,
no, I didn't I didn't think I'd win. Um,
but I wanted to get some I wanted to get
some arguments made, right? I worried
that my I worried that we were the party
was talking not enough about how it's
enterprise that leads to prosperity.
Is it a publicity thing running? Because
they I watch the US elections every
year. I'm obsessed with it. And it and
the same people run every year. they
know they're not going to win, but I
think the the exposure and publicity you
get is incredible.
Yeah, there's a of course um that's one
of the consequences. I basically had an
argument I wanted to make which was
which was okay, Brexit decisions been
taken.
Uh let's get that done and get on to
building a stronger economy in the
future and basically get it done as
quickly as we can and move forward. That
was the argument I wanted to make. I
managed to make the argument quite sort
of loudly because I was running Um and
then um uh well and then I pulled out
pulled out came seventh got behind
Boris.
I 10 was it?
Did you come seventh out of 10 or was it
I sixth or seventh?
Oh yeah. And then you got behind Boris.
And then I got behind Boris. Um
because you knew he would win.
Yeah. It was obvious that he was going
to win. Also, I came to the view that um
he he could sort the problem that we
were stuck with of Brexit better than
any of the other candidates. Um and also
I thought, you know, this guy has great
capabilities
and he needs people around him. I've had
so many people tag me on Instagram, even
on Telegram and in my Twitter DMs in a
picture of them starting their Hule
journey. And it's one of the most
amazing things in my life that I get to
do a podcast, which of course needs
money to to to fuel. And I have a
sponsor like Hule who I genuinely
believe is going to help every single
person who starts their heel journey
change their life because this podcast,
the central intention of this podcast is
to help people live better lives. And we
get to sit here and I get to promote to
you a product which has not only helped
me change my life, but it's going to
help millions of people and is helping
millions of people live a nutritionally
complete life. It's so it's such an
incredible product. And for me, the
reason why it's incredible is because it
gives me my protein. It gives me my
vitamins, minerals, it's plant-based,
it's low in sugar, gluten-free, it does
all of that in a small drink that tastes
good. There are other products, there's
foods, there's the hot and savory
collection, many other things. But for
me, this ready to drink is the absolute
savior of my diet throughout the week
where I'm moving at such pace. Look, I
don't want to labor the point, but if
you haven't tried here, give it a try.
And if you do, tag me, Instagram,
wherever you try it, give me a tag.
Anyway, back to the podcast.
We move forward to co
which was, you know, you you get
appointed as being the health minister
when a pandemic rolls in.
I know. I remember I remember seeing the
um the the Chinese publication on the
1st of January. So, it's New Year's Day
and I saw this uh thing on the inside
pages of one of the newspapers
um to say um the Chinese just announced
that there's a a new uh disease um and
nobody knew we didn't know it was a
corona virus. It might have been a flu.
Uh and nobody knew whether it was
serious or not. But I remember thinking,
"Well, maybe this is it." But I didn't
really think it was until
um until a couple of weeks later. When
was that that cuz I you know, I was
reading through all of the minutes from
your Sage meetings to try and understand
the the kind of phases of
cuz I listen I run business, right? And
we have crises and chaos and all those
things and there's various stages you go
through of trying to understand exactly
what this is and then how you know how
impactful it's going to be. Yeah. and
then what we should be doing and I kind
of ran through all of that. So when when
in your view did you start to realize
that
this wasn't just a cold or
end of January. So the Chinese published
the sequence of the genome of the of the
virus. So we then knew it was a corona
virus. Um that was bad news right
because we had a stockpile of flu
vaccine uh for this sort of emergency if
it had been a flu. Um, and the fact that
it was a corona virus and spreading this
rapidly in China was bad news. And then
at that point, I remember Chris Witty
saying to me, it's 50/50.
Something this contagious, either they
can hold it in China
or if it gets out of China, it's going
to go global. So, we were by the end of
January, we were on to um developing the
vaccine, for instance.
um and
trying to get the testing system up and
running. And then we had this surreal
month during February when nobody else
was sort of thinking that this was a big
thing and we still thought it was 50/50
but 50% chance of a global pandemic is
you know very very bad and we were I
remember standing next to the speakers
chair in the House of Commons for a
PMQ's watching
every single question was about
something else and nobody asked a
question about what became known as
COVID and I remember thinking at the end
of the session, the end of half hour,
every single question that has been
asked is totally irrelevant because it's
all about other things and we've got
this one fact in China and it is
it's totally dominant.
Why weren't you raising the bell?
Oh, I was I was giving statements to
parliament and what have you and we were
preparing inside government for what
needed to happen. So at the end of
January uh uh JVT came and said um I
said how long will it take to get a
vaccine? He said well normally it would
take 5 years but we think we can do it
in a year to 18 months.
He said January.
Yeah. If everything goes well and I said
your mission is to have a vaccine by
Christmas and we we he and the team that
we built pulled it off. Um so we were
getting things moving and then it was
when we saw the pictures from Italy. Do
you remember the you know that was the
moment
that I knew it was global
and that was what month?
That was the end of February.
February. Yeah.
Yeah. It was the end of February half
term
cuz everything was calm at this point.
We were watching it happen overseas. I
mean like I remember this the China
scenes.
Yeah.
Everyone was kind of calm about it. Old
China having a problem. That's kind of
how it felt.
And then the Italy moment was was
terrifying.
Yeah. That was the moment when it was
obvious it was coming.
Right. Um and um I remember having a
call that uh my my my German opposite
number who I got you became very close
to. He phoned me up. He said, "Have you
seen these pictures out of Italy?" I was
like, "Yeah." He was like, "This is it."
And he's like, "Yeah, this is it."
Um so that was the end of Yeah. That was
the end of February.
But still in March, there was a lot of
confusion in those stage minutes about
what to do. Yeah. About what was going
to happen. Could could we stop it?
Complete lack of data. That's the that
was the problem. Total positive data. Um
we had a um we didn't have a testing
regime. We had to build that from
scratch. Uh and so you didn't know how
many people had it. Um we didn't know
the characteristics of the disease. Uh
we didn't know what the um we didn't
know what you know what the symptoms
were largely because the symptoms of CO
are so varied that they didn't have a
full symptom list. One of the things
that we didn't know for ages which we
now take for granted knowing is how many
people have had it and have got the
antibodies. There was a big debate after
the first peak of um some people saying
uh they're optimists like me, but it
turns out far far too optimistic, right?
Saying, "Oh, you know, threequarters of
people must have had it by now, so
basically we're fine. Uh and we're
through it." And then so I got a survey
done taking people's blood and got the
got a representative sample. It took
ages to get this thing up and running
and we eventually got the data through
that said that something like in London
15% of people had had it and outside
London it was under five. It's like
Christ that means almost nobody's had it
and still we've had all these deaths and
that means you know that was the moment
we knew we had a major problem because
there was no way through this other than
the vaccine
and Sage at this point and the meetings
that you're having there there's kind of
this resignation that it is going to
just wipe through the population but but
the issue is the the objective is now
just to try and stop it smashing the NHS
basically.
Yeah. So the the what happened was you
know we saw those predictions of the the
reasonable worst case scenario but the
big problem was we were going up the
reasonable worst case scenario
quickly
you know and I remember I remember of
course I remember the the day that the
first person in the UK um died of COVID
but but I remember the day that oddly
something like the 32nd person died and
it's a funny say that number but it's a
there's a reason for it. I was sitting
on the side of my bath at home and I got
the news that we'd had 30 32 deaths and
suddenly there was a this isn't you know
one person for whom we've got a protocol
of how you manage that um terrible as
that is this is like big numbers and it
was a big jump in the number and I knew
that that that number was going to get
bigger and the worst period the the most
um sort of frightening period of the
whole thing was after we'd done the
lockdown we'd pulled every lever we
could. So, I remember sitting in the
cabinet room and saying, "We're going to
have to tell people to stop all
unavoidable social contact."
And you probably remember, you know,
that being said, and
um the the really frightening time was
after we'd done all those things,
brought in the lockdown, we'd done
everything, right? And if this disease
had carried on going up, there was there
was absolutely nothing more we could do.
We'd shut the schools. We'd shut
hospitality. You know, we'd pulled,
you know, we'd set out at the start of
March a a a set of options of levers
that we could pull to try to stop this
thing. And by the middle of March, we'd
pulled every lever. And it was a um and
and so the next two weeks as the numbers
carried on going up, they carried on
going up for about 10 days because of
the incubation period. That was that was
that was really scary. And then and then
and then they started to turn and then
we knew we could get this thing under.
The criticism leveled at the UK is that
we were the last like major western
country to pull those levers you've
described in mid-March. And when you
look through the minutes there is just
like several weeks of like confusion and
indecision. And obviously in those weeks
as you've described there what you
didn't from what I've seen in the
minutes and subsequent interviews is
what you didn't know was the speed of
transmission that was going on.
And obviously because of that 14-day
death delay.
Delay. Yeah. So, so it's funny that I'm,
you know, it's funny that the previous
conversation we had was about how you
should have the experts making the
decisions. Yeah. The truth is we didn't
have the the experts didn't have the
data either.
So, these were difficult calls actually
in terms of where we were on the curve.
We pulled the levers ahead of other
countries because we were a bit behind
Italy and and um uh uh Spain. Um but the
um
lever so Spain and Spain, France and
Italy went into lockdown on the 9th of
March.
Yeah. But we reckoned that we were
several weeks behind them in terms of
the progress of the virus that it as in
it had come to those countries first and
then from them to us. But either way
and that was wrong. the big picture. We
we were much closer to them than than
than uh we were being than the best
estimate, right, by these by the best
people who were in Sage, the the
scientists. And you know what it felt
like was this is an enormous call. So
the costs of action are huge.
The costs of inaction are also huge. So
you you know we knew when we were
sitting around the cabinet table making
these decisions that the that the the
the balance between these two was an
enormous enormous unknown. So in a with
an unprecedented virus with very little
data.
We were essentially you know doing these
things that were so we knew we were very
were going to be very damaging. If you
think about the story about I I told
earlier about coming in I I came into
politics partly because I had this
searing formulative experience of
something completely outside of our
control nearly knocking out the
livelihood of my family. Right? And here
I am
participating in decisions that were
going to have a more devastating impact
on on businesses
and and and people who rely on social
contact in order to to survive and
thrive. So we were hugely aware of the
of the pain that would come from the
decisions as well as the pain that would
come from uh from delay. And the other
thing that we didn't know was how the
public would react, right? And this is
there there's an optimistic story which
is the public were amazing, you know,
and and the advice that we were getting
was we're not sure whether the public
will will will put up with lockdown for
very long. Um and so you got to time the
period of lockdown. Actually, the public
were amazing once you explain that, you
know, there's a serious problem.
Um we're all going to have to uh do
something. it's going to be
uncomfortable, but we'll get through it
together. And the public were amazing.
Obviously, with Italy, Spain, and France
locking down first, there was also a bit
of a case study as to how publics will
react if if presented in a certain way
um to the lockdowns. The
because we were later in locking down
people.
If you look at the numbers, they say
that there's about 20 if we had locked
down a week earlier, 21,000 people would
still be alive from that first wave.
When when you hear that,
Yeah.
How does that how does that sound and
feel? And also around that time Boris
Johnson goes and does that interview and
references one of the options being
taking it on the chin. And then in
hindsight, how does that all feel for
you personally? That thought that one
week earlier we could have saved 21,000
lives.
Yeah. Um
it's
obviously it's something that I'll I'll
always think about. Um,
you know,
if I search for what I really believe
about that and the honest truth is the
honest truth is that
we didn't know.
And of course, you know, hindsight is a
wonderful thing. And
it was about it was judgments based on
on on these you know this the the the
balance of these two scales. Um and um
I think that whenever you go through a
period of history ultimately it's about
learning from it. You know you've got to
make sure that that if this if a
pandemic you know a disease happens
again we'll be far better prepared. And
I think that the I think the Far East
was far better prepared because they'd
been through MS and SARS and and um
honestly that how how I feel is like I
really wish we'd known then what we knew
now. What what if you in hindsight then
because we're playing games of hindsight
now which are as as they say it's 2020
but what are when you look back honestly
at the decisions that were made and how
you got the data and the way that the
meetings were handled with Sage and all
of these and ultimately what led to
these decisions what in hindsight which
is a wonderful thing that we can only
deploy in in the past in hindsight what
do you think were the mistakes or the
areas where we could have done better in
the decision-m how we got the
information and all those things what
were those mistakes in hindsight.
Well, um you know, we made there were
some mistakes that we made in terms of
the measures.
Yeah.
How they were brought in
as in not hard enough or
just you know
just details about the things that
really really matter to people. Um I'll
give you one example. Um funerals.
We brought in rules saying that six
people could go to a a funeral. I think
it was it very very restrictive
but for some people especially people
who were shielding
the rules were interpreted as in some
cases even the spouse shouldn't go to
the funeral if they were shielding. Now
that was that was terrible. I remember
watching that the film of a young boy
who died who was buried by people in
hazmat suits without his parents there
and
you know that was just awful and
you know you listen to that right and we
changed the rules and made it made it
clear so you know that was a that was
all all the time I tell you know all the
time we were on the lookout for, okay,
what do we need to be doing differently?
Cuz it was unprecedented.
And there was a um
and you know, in hindsight, some of it
looks like these were sort of hard and
fast and obvious decisions. They weren't
obvious decisions at all, and we were
constantly sort of questioning ourselves
uh in terms of um in terms of whether we
got the judgment right.
What was your life like in that time?
Oh, yeah. Well, I I so my alarm went off
at 6:00 every morning and um I'd um you
know, I I basically had about
uh half an hour with the kids in the
morning and then uh I'd get picked up at
7:30, maybe 7:00 and uh and then and
then work just, you know, unbelievable.
um until about about midnight. And I you
know what my my permanent secretary
Chris Wald at the start said, "This is
not going to be over in a in a couple of
weeks, right? You've got to get we've
all got to get ourselves into a position
where we can just keep going. This is a
marathon, not a sprint." And um um and
there was a um a weekend basically meant
that we didn't start work till about
9:00. And so that was the you know that
was the the time off. so to speak. And
that it was like that for three or four
months during that period.
What about your mental health position?
Cuz I
Yeah.
You know, cuz that feeling that going
home every day with that feeling that my
decisions could sway as we saw
negatively in this case, you know, 21
million 21,000 lives for better or for
worse and ultimately, you know, 160,000
people died. You're going home with that
every day with that thought that your
deci the decisions you're making now as
health secretary
Yeah.
are life and death. How do you relax?
How do you
Yeah, I think that's
I relaxation I got to through exercise.
Um but the um in the health department
the sense was a total sense of mission.
Um and I've never been in the military
but some people say this is what it's
like when you're on a military operation
as well. um as in there was a focus over
how to optimize how we could make
decisions. You know, of course there
were sleepless nights, but really we
thought, you know, when we had some, you
know, Chris Witty himself is a brilliant
advisor on how to keep yourself, you
know, personally in the um in in the
zone. So the the sense of mission that
we were trying to solve something that
was incredibly difficult as best as we
could um was very very strong in that
period.
Did you have anxiety?
It depends what you mean by anxiety. Of
course I was anxious about every you
know all these big decisions
about that that awful sense of
nervousness that you know can be
crippling at times you know that
yeah but it was yes up to the but not
about I you know I didn't I didn't find
it I I didn't find it crippling. I found
it motivating. Do do you know when I say
anxiety, do you know what I mean? I
mean, there's the the kind of phrase of
describing something as being an anxious
situation, but then actually suffering
with anxiety.
Yeah. Not not in a medical I didn't feel
that in a medical sense. I basically
felt like I got up in the morning and I
did my level best and then I went to
sleep and then I woke up and repeated
the exercise and that and for me that
was the only way to get through it
without sort of collapsing in a hoop. If
you'd known that a pandemic would roll
in, would you have avoided that health
secretary job? Be honest with me.
I
don't know. I don't know. That's a great
question.
Someone's got to do it.
Would you have
if you knew that that situation was
coming?
If I knew this situation was coming,
there's about hundred things I'd
immediately have done, right? We would
have
No, no, no. I mean, would you have put
yourself in that role if you knew the if
if I said now there's a pandemic coming
next week. Do you want do you want the
job of being health secretary?
Such a what if question?
But I I would answer it.
The honest truth is yes.
You would take it.
Yeah.
Okay.
Cuz someone's got to make the decisions.
Okay. So, one of the one of the
Do you know what do you know what the
the overriding sense is um that I'm
trying to articulate not particularly
well is a sense of this sense of duty,
right? when the really bad stuff happens
and and you're in the job, you got to
stand up and be counted.
One of the decisions that was made was
and ultimately criticizes this whole
care home stuff. What's your view on
that before we
Yeah. So, so okay, this is a really good
example of um the the the
of of of learning from what you're
seeing on the ground. So the criticism
runs that um the NHS made a decision to
get people out of hospitals because we
needed hospital space and send them into
care homes and that took COVID with them
and a lot of people died.
Um that criticism is wrong. Um but
there's a different criticism which is
more accurate. The re the reason that's
wrong is um twofold. There's been a
piece of work that's a piece of uh
analysis that's done that shown that
approximately 2% of the uh infections
that got into care homes were from that
route. Um the um and the reason for that
is that when those people went into the
care homes they were they then isolated
in the care homes um because they
weren't tested because the tests didn't
exist. Now I wish to God that the tests
had existed and we you know that was a
big part of my life trying to build this
testing system um but they they didn't
exist and most of those people who left
hospital actually went home not into not
into care homes. The truth is that the
peak in the care homes came about a
month later. So the facts don't even
stack up this narrative but there've
been there you know there's a few false
narratives that have got going about the
pandemic and that's one of them. The
truth is, and we couldn't say it, we
didn't want to say it at the time
because we didn't want to demotivate
people, but the truth is that the main
route of the virus getting into care
homes sadly was from staff because staff
live in the community and this disease
was rife in the community, but I didn't
want to stand at that podium and give
the impression I was blaming the staff.
The thing that we then did was we
changed the rules so you could not work
in more than one care home. And in the
second wave the number of deaths in care
homes was far far lower and we had the
testing. So actually the what we needed
to have done was do the do the pol the
staff movement policy much earlier
and we hadn't we hadn't spotted that
that was the route. Um and so you know
there there's an inquiry that will come
and go through all these things and I'm
actually looking forward to it because
there's a whole series of points where
we've got to make sure we learn the
right lesson. Uh, and then there's a
couple of other things that are upper
there that, you know, just aren't true
and need to be like this whole, you
know, we talked about criticism as a
politician, right? One of the things
I've been criticized for is for giving a
contract to the local pub landlord,
right? I don't know whether you've read
that story.
Yeah, I've heard all of that stuff.
Yeah.
It's just not true.
We'll talk about that. I want to just
because the point on the care home bit,
it's good. So, you've answered one of my
points there, which was about that whole
rumor that people were being released
from the NHS into care homes and that
was causing issues. The thing that that
I saw from the Sage minutes was that on
the roughly the 10th of March, which was
fairly early in all of this,
Sage did say that there should be
special policy consideration given to
care homes and various types of types of
retirement communities.
Presumably, you had the data at that
point that said elderly people were
being disproportionately affected by
so around the 10th of March,
but it's there should probably should
have been an action taken. And then in
the sage minutes, you don't really see
care homes or retirement communities
mentioned again until a month later when
there's been serious death in care
homes. I think people going into care
homes were 10 times more likely to die
than if they had just gone gone home
because of the because of the more than
10 times more likely to die. I think at
the peak of the the pandemic, the first
wave, they were 17 times more likely to
die in a care home than had they just
gone home to live with, you know, in a
private home.
Yeah. But that's because there's lots of
reasons for that. You've got to unpack
it. So firstly, it is the most
vulnerable people who live in care
homes. So their their vulnerability to
the disease is much greater. Secondly,
you know, the nature of care homes is
obviously that the disease can spread
more easily and every European country
uh had this problem. But the broader
point about the sage minutes um uh
around that time um action was taken but
we didn't get to the policy that I think
had the best impact which was the
stopping people from working in more
than one care home for several months
afterwards. And if we if we'd known that
that was going to be the thing that
would say stop it as much as it did
obviously we would have done that
um we would have done that earlier. But
but again it comes down to to not
knowing.
Yeah. And I I guess this is a point of
judgment. Hindsight has revealed that
that was a mistake. Some countries got
it right. New York didn't get it right
either,
but other countries did get that,
you know. And the other thing we were
worried about, so we were worried about
a different problem that didn't happen.
And sometimes this, you know, it's you
it's important at the to think about at
the time the things we're worrying
about. So in Spain,
a whole care home full of elderly people
had died because the staff had all gone
home.
So we were also worried about making
sure that the care homes remained
staffed because people in care homes die
if the staff aren't there. So thankfully
that never happened, but we were worried
about the the the care the you know we
were worried about the opposite problem
at the same time. and um uh and and you
know thankfully we avoided one
but but the other one came to pass.
Do you look back on that that decision
in particular cuz that's one of the big
criticisms that a lot of people level at
the um handling of the the process. Do
you look back at that as a another
mistake in hindsight?
Because you you as you say, you were
trying to make the best decision on
balance, right?
I I know I know for sure and
what you've done differently is make it
better. Yeah.
What? So on this foresight hindsight
thing, I know for sure
that I did my best
and I know that the team around me
worked with, you know, did work with the
right motives to get through as best we
could.
the um the importance of learning how
best to handle this situation
for god forbid if it happens again
is absolutely vital but I worry as much
about learning the wrong lessons as
learning the right lessons. So that's
why it's important that we have this
sort of discussion about about the care
homes in particular
um to to make sure that just because
something is in the narrative it doesn't
necessarily mean it's true. Uh without
doubt, if I'd known then what I know
now, we would have brought in the staff
movement rule much earlier. In fact, do
you know what? You should probably have
it in normal times as well because lots
of people die each year in of flu in
care homes and you know, so the and the
and the processes of how flu gets into a
care home are probably the same as COVID
because it's just another communicable
disease. when people like mark the
success of um our handling of the
pandemic, one of the ways that they
choose to do it is to compare it to
other countries and in that first wave
in particular, our deaths were just so
much higher than the comparable
countries. So, does is that not an
indicator that we messed up or that we
got it or that our judgment calls turned
out to be the wrong ones?
A combination of a combination of
things, right? combination things like
the timing of the decisions to lock
down.
Um the obesity of our nation compared to
others is one another factor.
Um one of the factors that um the
experts think is a cause is that lots of
people travel from all over the UK to
Spain and Italy during that halfter
term. And so it was brought back and
seeded across the whole country. Whereas
other some other countries like France
had it very badly in a in a couple of
cities but didn't have the spread in the
way we did. So there's some things that
are essentially you know just just facts
of life that were outside anybody's
control. Obviously that's not you know
what you're getting at and it's not the
stuff that really affects how I think
about it because it's the it's the
active decisions that
we also need to you know we need to go
through and learn from. So would you
that's what I'm saying is is is the the
the large number of deaths that we had
versus other countries
a indicator that we made poor decisions
in that first wave.
Well now you see Stephen you're getting
into gotcha questions.
No I genuinely cuz because we're going
to come on to the good stuff right we're
going to come into the fact that we're
out of lockdowns for everybody else.
So the but the way the reason I I
reacted that way is that is that it is
self-evident and obvious that you've got
to improve decisions and learn from
them. And the best and the best proof
point of this and the best um sort of
it's obvious from anybody who's run any
organization is you constantly got to be
asking was that the best decision?
And part of leadership
is to allow your team to
essentially learn from and change their
decisions, not stay stuck with them just
because that's the decision that we
took. and in the second and subsequent
waves
we have done relatively better
internationally. So how I feel about all
that is I feel um I feel sad that the
performance in the first half
if you like was not as good as it could
have been.
Okay, that answers the question.
And then I feel and I but I feel pleased
that we learned quite a few things
and in a way you know we did better
second time round.
Yeah. But the thing I felt at the time,
and this is true in any organization
I've been in, is that if you want people
to perform at their best, they have to
know that if they screw up, they're not
going to get shouted at. The question is
not who did that, it's how do we fix it?
Yeah.
And that was a that attitude was a big
part of um of of how things, you know,
we managed to get better. You know,
testing is another example, right?
testing first it was you know it was far
we we didn't have any we built it as
fast as we could that needed to go much
faster by this Christmas the Americans
were saying why can't we have a testing
system like uh like the UK you know and
my view is that uh do Harding did an
amazing job but every time we had a
screw-up the question that we asked was
how do we fix it not whose fault is it
did you actually think that was a gotcha
question because do you think do you
think I'm the type of person that would
sit and
I don't think you are which is why I
called you out on it because
No yeah yeah I It's every question I ask
is honestly honestly genuine because and
and then you're right there's so many
things that we did better than all of
these other nations and I'll be honest
I'm sat here really lucky that we're
able to do this in person because of the
decisions that the UK took.
So no what I meant by gotcha is that you
know the the question of um will you get
the guy to say he that there was x
screw-up is a classic of the today
program. I I bas my
and actually frankly makes some of the
decision-m harder.
No, I I no I I understand what you're
saying. Um my question was that is the
was the the the increase in death at the
start does is that evidence as people
claim that we made in hindsight cuz
that's all we have now in hindsight the
decisions were wrong. And also there's
this other exacerbating factor which was
I mean the World Health Organization at
the time and even I tweeted it said that
there wasn't we couldn't wait for a
vaccine. They said that we that's what
they said. They said we couldn't wait
for a vaccine because sometimes vaccines
I mean there's not a vaccine for SARS
still. Sometimes they take five or 10.
So you so you you thought there was
always going to be a vaccine.
Yeah. And and and it's true that
sometimes Yeah. In number 10 he was
basically the only other person who
agreed with me.
Why did he say the take it on the chin
thing?
Um
cuz I use that in my
he was I I remember that he was he was
actually trying to argue against that.
He was saying he was saying it comes
down to how difficult it is to
communicate in uncertainty. He was
saying some people are saying we ought
to take it on the chin. I don't agree
with that. I think we need to act. But
so one of the reasons it's hard to
communicate in politics and one of the
reasons it's hard to communicate
empathetically
is that you have to both have the actual
conversation but also every single word
you say
can be twisted
will be taken and analyzed for better or
for worse. And I don't hold this against
the media particularly, but they they
will look at them those words both
within the context and out of context.
And so, you know, this is true of this
interview, but I knew that coming into
it and have decided just to try to
answer the questions. Um the um but that
is part of communication. So I the the
the you know Boris saying that um some
people say we should just what I can't
remember the exact word.
take it on the chin, right? But I don't
think that's the way we should do it.
Instead, we should do it that way. It
was written written up as Boris Float's
idea of taking it on chin. Well, he did
float the idea, but he then immediately
rejected it for a different proposition.
I I did read the Sage minutes and to to
his and your credit, you don't mention
her immunity as a as the strategy to
take forward in those minutes. Correct.
From what I saw. So although that was a
widespread narrative, it's not actually
what was going on in the meeting. The
truth there is that some people were
pushing the herd immunity idea,
right?
And then um the ca it came it came it
bubbled up and came to a head.
Yeah.
And I had I went out and killed it. I
was like no we are not doing that.
So you you knew that a vaccine was going
to be
I had at first it was faith right. At
first it was faith and it gradually
became more and more real.
Okay. Um, and I just I I I knew that
we'd got a vaccine for Ebola,
right?
And the the Oxford vaccine actually
comes from the work several years before
to get an Ebola vaccine.
Mh. And I had I just had this belief and
maybe it's because I'm an optimist once
the data came out in about May that
showed that only you know this tiny
proportion of the public had had
antibodies and had had exposure and
therefore it was obvious and
categorically impossible to get to uh
the levels of antibodies you need across
society without a huge amount of
suffering and death. Um i.e. the people
who'd been promoting her immunity were
now evidently and scientifically wrong.
It wasn't just it was a bad idea, it was
provably a bad idea. Once we got to that
point, there was only one way out and
that was a vaccine. And you know, I
believe in the power of human ingenuity
and I uh believed in the team in Oxford.
Um, and I also thought that when the
whole world is searching for something,
then
then somebody was going to get it right.
And so we brought in u people to to go
and buy from around the world like like
Kate Bingham. And we took this attitude
which was sure we back the British one,
but we absolutely we're going shopping
as well, right? And and and money is no
object. Um and um and and and that's
what we did and thank god we did it.
Was there a tipping point where because
in the sage minutes there's there's this
understanding that this is going to go
through the population and that really
the the central objective has to be to
protect the NHS
and then was there a tipping point where
you realized the vaccine was going to
come and it was going to come quickly.
So the strategy then has to go to like a
the vaccine's on its way so now it's
about actually limiting death as well.
So it was once we found out then um that
only a small proportion of the
population had had it.
Mhm.
It was obvious from then on that the
only way out was through a vaccine. And
therefore the policy became to suppress
the virus until a vaccine makes us safe.
And I then repeated that all the way
through the summer, the autumn and in
the autumn I was arguing for, you know,
to keep this thing under control because
the vaccine's around the corner. And
people were briefing against me that no,
you know, Hanok's the only one who
believes in the vaccine and it's a
running joke that there's only one
person who thinks the vaccine is going
to happen and and and partly to try to
stop some of the complications that had
happened in testing. I report I just
spoke directly to the prime minister on
this one and didn't go through his then
advisers in number 10 and and and it and
it came good. We have a brand new
sponsor for the podcast and it's a brand
called Crafted as you can see on the
table in front of me if you're watching
this on YouTube. crafted our brands that
sell really meaningful affordable men's
jewelry and I've been a crafted customer
I think for about 3 years now and all of
the pieces that crafted have created
have deeper meaning the piece of jewelry
I wear the most I want to introduce you
to the pieces and why I wear them is
this sand timer unsurprising and the
thing for me about sand timer is it's
probably the most clear reminder that
our time here on earth is finite and
when you live in such a way where you
can literally see your time pouring away
and you realize ize that it is scarce
and that we're not all here forever. You
start to make better decisions. You stop
worrying about pettiness and
trivialities that consume our lives. I
always have this Crafted Sand timer
around my neck as a reminder of that.
And this is why I wanted Crafted to
sponsor this podcast because I can use
their meaningful jewelry every episode
to deliver a meaningful message. Quick
one. As many of you know, I've been
trying to make my life a little bit more
sustainable as it relates to energy ever
since I sold my Range Rover Sport and
bought an electric bicycle. And My
Energy, as a sponsor of this podcast,
are one of the brands that make that
transition much, much easier. They are
at the forefront of British renewable
eosmart technology. And their products
are really, really changing the game. If
you're on YouTube, you can see what I'm
holding in my hand. This is called the
Eddi, right? It's the UK's number one
solar powered diverter. So, what is a
solar diverter? It's a device for people
like you and me. That means you can
divert your excess energy back into your
home rather than back into the grid,
which will save you power and money.
It's super userfriendly and easy to
install, and you can control it using
the My Energy app on your phone. To find
out more about this product and more
products like it that will help you make
that sustainable transition, head over
to myenergy.com. And um I highly
recommend you check out the Eddie. It's
um it's a real game changer for a
product and one that I'm going to be
installing in my home soon.
You talked about the some of the pro
procurement room is there. One of them
particularly that you you meant you
wanted to mention about a pub a friend
that runs is a pubition or something.
Yeah. So so I mean this is an example of
why of how you need to go through these
things properly and how narratives can
sort of spin out of control. And this is
true on social media which you're a
great expert in but it's also true in
the mainstream media. So for some reason
that I that is lost in the midst of
time, some of the papers got the idea
that the landlord in the village that I
had previously lived in in Suffukk um
who had then gone on to uh run this
factory had got a contract that I had
given him
and you know it was on the front page of
the Guardian for several days and it was
a and and it's just all it's not true.
He didn't have a contract with the
department. He didn't have a contract
with the NHS. Um he yes, he he he
flipped his factory to making those
little plastic tubes, uh you know, the
ones that you um stick your your test
thing into, but we needed millions of
these things and somebody had to.
I didn't have anything to do with the
contracting arrangements cuz he he was a
subcontractor to another business. So
there's no way that we I mean it's just
a total it's a total nonsense. And so in
a in a stressed period like a pandemic,
a lot of conspiracy theories got going.
This was one of them. There've been
loads on on vaccines from the antivaxers
and dealing. So you got to deal with
that misinformation at the same time as
trying to make the best decisions as you
can. And that is one of the that is one
of the hardest things to wrestle with in
in terms of how we communicate.
The um the rumor around that time was
that he'd sent you a WhatsApp message
and you'd like forwarded him on to
someone and that had led to him getting
a a deal. Yeah. So he he I mean these
WhatsApps have been been published under
FOI. The the WhatsApp was about
something incredibly banal. It was about
standardizing the size of these tubes
across different suppliers
so that they could be made more
efficiently. I mean like a really in the
weeds bit of policy that and I just
pinged this on to the people. I mean I
was I it was
okay.
It it was at a level of detail about
eight below where I was um operating.
There was in 20 May 2021
there was there's some minor inadvertent
breach because you held shares in a firm
that had got a contract.
No.
So that's not true either. There you go.
I mean this is um I I was I was given
some shares in my sister's company,
right? Um and they had a contract an
existing contract with the Welsh NHS and
I wasn't responsible for the Welsh NHS.
So it's another example. How you are you
familiar with that rumor that?
Yeah. Yeah, of course. Of course. I
mean, I have to I have to deal with the
these rumors all the time and sometimes
people stand up in parliament and say it
and you just have to hit it on the head
every time it comes up. It's just not
true. But the but there's an underlying
problem which is that you know the
people working to save lives in this
period were working incredibly hard
to just deliver that as best as they
could. And all the people who now try to
sort of say, "Oh, no, no, you were
trying to contract for this." It's just
all total rubbish. I mean, you got there
is no other description of it.
On the 8th, I think it was the 8th of
December, you where that that first
vaccine was administered and you went on
TV and got very you cried.
I did. Yeah.
Yeah.
Talk to me about that day and those
feelings and what was going through your
mind.
Well, that was it was incredibly
emotional. It was because
because we'd put everything into this
and the very first vaccine down the
track, so to speak, had worked, right?
We bought six vaccines,
uh, including the Oxford one. Um,
actually, one of them only got approved
about two weeks ago. And imagine if, you
know, imagine if that that had been the
case for all six. So the fact that the
very first one
sailed through and has worked
brilliantly and then the Oxford one like
the home the home um uh vaccine that
also has gone brilliantly although the
you know there's a load of noise and the
politics of it and the Europeans getting
shirty but on a clinical basis has been
amazing. Um and um so on the 8th of
December
the first person receives it and this is
the way out of this terrible situation
that we're all in and all these people
had died
and I knew that science was going to
save us. But that wasn't the worst. You
know that was then the problem was at
the same time you know we were having
the second wave getting really big. So
it was a really mixed period because we
had the the the joy that the vaccine was
working but at the same time you know
cases growing and um I was on I was on
Good Morning Britain um and I hadn't
seen the image you know the video of
Margaret Keenan getting I'm sure you're
thinking of it now right we can all
remember it and I had but I hadn't seen
that image and they showed the image and
I completely lost it and I was I was in
floods of tears and totally lost control
of my um of my of my body and my voice.
Um and then I tried to pull it together
and they said in my ear, you know, we're
coming back to you in five. And um and I
tried to pull it together. I just about
got it together and then started talking
to I think it was Pier Morgan again. And
on Twitter they were like, "This guy's
making it up. He's not authentic. He was
just trying to cry." The honest truth
was if they'd come back to me like 5
seconds earlier, I would have been in a
complete mess. And I was trying to hold
myself together. And maybe maybe as
politicians we do that too often. I was
maybe I should have just been more
relaxed about it because I got a load of
abuse for looking inauthentic because I
was trying to sort of be professional
and um and and and and not cry.
Well, for me that was actually the first
time that I thought you you did have
empathy. I know that, right? Because
because I I've said on this podcast
which you've listened to, I said that I
thought you were an emotionless robot
and I genuinely
outrageous
genuine just being honest like I
genuinely like genuinely I I've I think
Justinda in New Zealand has felt much
more I don't know like human and
emotional and I think that gives gives
me as a muggle as a normal person a
sense that they understand me. So when I
see politicians being a bit
straightfaced and tough,
you know who was really good at that,
Barack Obama. He would cry after Sandy
Hook and these these kids shootings, he
would just cry. He would stand there in
front of the nation and he would cry.
And it made me realize that he felt the
same way that I did. Whereas I the
reason I said you were I thought you
were an emotionless robot. And I know
you heard it
was because I'd never seen that. And
part of the reason I'll be honest and I
got to be fair part of the reason I'd
never seen that is because you're put in
situations where they are trying to
always just get you like 5 10 minutes.
Well that's that's part of the
defensive.
Yeah. So one of the things I've learned
without a shadow of a doubt is that
you've just you've got to um you've just
got to let that show. And I f you know
as a I find that um I find it hard. Um
and um you just got to let that emotion
show more. Um and and and just just try
to be just try to say it as you feel it.
Um the podium doesn't help. All right.
The very formal communication method,
you know, two Union Jacks Oak
background. Um the so the podium doesn't
always help to because it puts that a
barrier in place. But then you mentioned
Barack Obama and you know he stood stood
the podium wasn't a problem for him
but he extraordinary communicator right
he is extraordinary.
You said you find it hard to show that
emotion.
Yeah. Because the my the natural
instinct when you're under especially
when you're under pressure and
questioning is to say is to sort of
uh go
go alpha male. isn't always the best
answer.
I think that is a problem with politics.
I think that um I think that the
political leaders that probably will end
up doing really well. And I don't
honestly I don't see this on either side
of the aisle.
But, you know, because because I'm
relaxed now in the way that we're
talking, there'll probably be something
on Mail Online tomorrow. You know,
Hancock's in such and such a screw up,
right? It because that's how I don't
know what it is. I mean, we've been
talking for so long, but I I there is
there will be um that is how the media
reacts. And so you and so once you once
you once you're kind of experienced in
seeing that reaction, right, you also
then it tempers how you talk. So
actually coming in, one of the reasons I
wanted to come in and talk to you was
because I want to just talk freely
and I don't care if that is on, you
know, item 10 of the mail online
tomorrow. Um, I'm just trying to answer
the questions as best I can and I I
genuinely think that is a better way of
of communicating in politics and it's
definitely something that I've learned.
Yeah. And it's something that I' I've
just seem to be so absent on both sides
of the aisle is um a real sincere
feeling of like empathy and I think that
makes politicians feel like they're not
us.
Yeah. More distant. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah.
No. And there ends up being a language
of politics. Yeah. and and some people
thinking that they don't understand the
code of you know it's as if it's a a
code and you know there is a um and it's
just it's not helpful because it puts a
a barrier up. I work really hard at
trying to do that. That's why I was so
upset when I heard you say somebody I
really respect saying that I'm an
emotional wreck or what not emotional
the opposite emotionist robot.
Thanks. No, I gota be honest. No, but
honestly for me for me that it's it's
important to say because a it's what I
said and what I felt and and b it's
actually not just you. It's generally
like the politics as as a whole. I'm
like what I see in normal people is real
empathy. And do you know do you know the
other thing is it's language.
Yeah.
When you when you when you do those
interviews on Good Morning Britain or
whatever
Yeah.
the language is not human language. It's
very political and very controlled. And
I I think PR training is honestly a c
politics I work so hard not to do that
political training but
but it is and it's but it's in
particular in response to the aggressive
questions right so you you have not
asked any aggressive questions you've
asked insightful questions instead but
when you're on you know when you get D
type question you give the D type answer
yeah and that and I think that's the
issue is how do we get to a state where
politicians go you know what that was a
bit of a mistake and hindsight's a
wonderful You know, I'll tell I'll say
I'll tell you a story. Um the first time
I did any questions
uh when I was new in parliament um I um
you go for a meal before you do any
questions and um Nigel Farage was on as
well and he had two pints and I and I
said to him like you have two pints
before going on any question he said
yeah cuz otherwise I can't talk freely
and um I sat next to him and he managed
to get every single question to answer
to an answer about why awful why uh
Europe was awful. Um and um but he just
absolutely, you know, he he had a couple
of pints and and he sounded like he'd
had a couple of pints. Now um I don't
you know, whatever you think of his
politics, his ability to communicate in
a relaxed way and I remember thinking
every time I then saw him, that was
years before the referendum, every time
I saw like you obviously been drinking.
I mean maybe maybe that's one way to but
I I feel like it shouldn't have to. I
think that the the the people that are
really going to resonate with the the
public are going to be the normal people
that break through without political PR
training. Yeah.
I think they'll resonate way more with
people. I think Obama was he felt like
one of them to me. I know people some
people hate him and there's lots of
things with drones and whatever, but
he felt like someone in the way he spoke
that I could relate to because I felt
the sincere emotion. I don't really get
that from Boris. I don't necessarily
feel like Boris has the same. And then
we go back to
Oh, I disagree. I disagree with that. I
think that one of the reasons that Boris
um relates to people and people relate
to him is because he he doesn't speak in
as you call it political speak. Um one
of the reasons he is such an effective
communicator whether you agree with him
or not um is that uh is that he he he
doesn't play by those rules.
I I I understand what you're saying. He
doesn't he didn't entirely feel like a
politician. to come back to this
question about you know when we were
talking about at the start about
people's backgrounds. Yeah. Right.
Um you know Boris has a background as
different from the voters of Heartleyool
as it's possible to get. Um but you know
he can he can reach people
and I think that's actually I think he's
a good I put him in the Barack Obama
category actually. Really?
Yeah. Yeah. For people of a different
politics. Yeah. I would because um he
because he's one of the few people who
who could who really just um you will
withstand the sort of criticism of the
of the next days press in order to try
to actually say how he feels. He's a
very very um emotionally engaged person.
Let's talk about some of the stuff that
you haven't really been able to speak
about at length which was in September
2020 we there was laws established that
well not laws but there was guidance
given to stop us engaging within um
having casual sex with people outside of
our household etc etc
right
do you think you can answer ask the
question in a little bit more respectful
way
so in September 2020 you said this is
what you said um established couples
should be shouldn't be having sex there
should be boundaries you warned against
casual text advising the public to stick
to well established relationships and
joking I know I'm in an established
relationship and you told us to remember
the basics of hands face space
and and throughout that period hugging
was not I remember you saying that you
were looking forward to hugging your mom
in um the 17th of May and then all of
this stuff comes out with the son the
CCTV leak and everything in between.
Yeah,
there's a there's obvious
Can we just start this section again?
How how would you like to start it? I
don't mind all of it except the opening
bit about casual sex. I haven't had
casual sex with anybody. I fell in love
with somebody and we're gonna and
let me ask the question and you can
correct the question. Right. So there's
there's all of this stuff which what I'm
saying is from there.
Well, let's start this bit again and
I'll and I'll relax.
Okay, fine. But you've got to let me ask
the question. This is what we do here.
We just we just talk. There's no this
isn't
Yeah, but you've got you've researched a
bit about casual sex. I'm not
I've not even asked the question yet.
Okay, let's do get to that bit. So in
September 2020, you said that when when
asked that established couples um
only established couples should be
having sex. There needs to be
boundaries. You want to
No. No. Okay. So
um those rules
Yeah.
were not in place.
That was that was advice on TV.
Yeah. But those rules were not in place
when this all this happened. So there's
a way that we can do this bit of the
conversation, but we cannot do it with
you starting talking about casual sex.
Can can I ask the question?
You can ask a question, but let's ask a
question in a reasonable way.
Okay, so I'm going to ask a question.
Just this bit is really hard for me as
well.
I I completely understand. I completely
understand. I actually haven't asked the
question yet.
This is all just a preamble.
No, no, it's not. I What the point The
point that's been leveled at you is very
simple. It's that there's a
contradiction in what you said and how
you behaved. That's what that's what
I totally get that bit.
So, can I ask that question?
Yeah, go for it.
So, the point that's been leveled at you
is there's a contradiction in how you
behaved. Yeah.
Versus what the guidance you were giving
as health secretary.
Yes.
This is not a revelation. I mean, this
is not a revelation.
Exactly. This is what everyone's been
saying. Hugging was advised against, you
know, distance. There was this whole
hands, face, space thing which we were
all told to obey. Yeah. and couples were
um when when when asked you were said to
stick within well-established
relationships and you jokingly said I
know I'm in an established relationship
then this CCTV stuff comes out
my question is you know you talked
earlier on about funerals and people
going through immense hardship
people say you you were a contradiction
what's your response to that
how do you how do you receive all of
that when everyone this is what everyone
says this is not Steve has said it for
the first time it's what the whole world
is saying at you
this is the central thing.
Yeah.
And this is ultimately why you resigned.
That is my absolute That is my response.
So
I resigned because I broke the social
distancing guidelines.
Yeah.
Um by then they weren't actually rules.
They weren't the law, but that's not the
point. The point is they were the
guidelines that I'd been proposing.
And you know
that happened because I fell in love
with somebody
and you know I I've known Gina for more
than half of my life and we first
actually worked together on student
radio um back in the Oxford days and um
I brought her into the department to
help with public communications in the
same way we brought loads of brilliant
people in who were experts in their
field. Um, and so we spent a lot of time
together, ironically, trying to, you
know, get me to be able to communicate
in a more emotionally intelligent way.
And and and
we fell in love and,
you know, that's something that
that was completely outside of my
control. Um, and I of course I I regret
the, you know, the the pain that that's
caused and the very very very public
nature. You know, anybody who's been
through this knows how difficult it is,
how painful it is. Doing that in public
is incredibly painful.
And um,
but but you know, I I fell in love with
someone.
You did you fall in love while working
together?
Yeah. Okay.
So, you know, nobody, you know, we we it
all happened quite it all happened quite
quickly. It actually happened after this
sort of thing stopped being after the
rules were lifted. Um but the guidance
was still in place. So, I'm not trying
to claim that, you know, I hold no
bitterness about about this because um I
broke the rules. You know, I fess up. I
broke um the uh the guidance. Um and you
know, there were only two people
responsible for this. Um and and and
ultimately that's why I resigned. I I
took responsibility for my decision and
I resigned.
Um when that CCTV stuff happens, and I'm
not going to go into the details of cuz
I I don't want to drag people into this,
but I want to understand how that feels.
I can only imagine having dealt with a
pandemic and then getting this call from
the sun
that they're about to leak something.
Yeah. I
for me this is the this is the I would I
don't like I don't have the words to
describe
how that must have all felt but tell me
when you get that call
it was it was it was awful
um
it was awful because
you know we obviously knew what was
going on. Um, but we wanted to
uh to
to do this as unpainfully as possible
and by and by the release of those
images obviously that caused a huge
amount of pain and um
the uh and and it was it's it's it's
been I mean anybody knows anybody knows
how difficult it is it you know ending a
ending a relationship ship. Um, and we
have six children. You know, it's it
tough, but you know,
um, Junior and I love each other very
deeply.
And, um,
what where are we? 7, eight months
later,
it gets gets a bit easier with time. Um
and um but I have no sort of
I don't hold it against anybody
because I was because you know we were
I take responsibility.
Have have they figured out where that
footage came from?
Yeah. You know so many people asked me
this question.
Everyone's asked the question
and um do you know my honest the honest
feeling I have in response to that
question is I just don't care. Right.
the actually there's there's a funny
story which is that um the best I know
is that it was one of the um security
guards in the department. Um there's a
current ICO investigation. I don't know
any of the details of that
investigation. I haven't got any inside
information other than that which is
public. However, the investigation
uh is based on a law, data protection
law that I took through parliament into
which I personally put a journalistic
exemption. So,
I'm I I don't hold it against um the
against the journalists for publishing
it. Um but obviously, you know, it was a
very serious data data protection
breach, if you like. The thing that re
we've learned and I think all my other
colleagues in cabinet learned
immediately is why did you have a CCTV
in the Secretary of State's office?
Obviously, I didn't know about it.
Um and um because even who's in the
office is a is a is an important fact
and a and a sensitive pieces of
information. Um but all of that is by
them by because you know it is not the
responsibility of others that um that
those social distancing guidelines were
broken. You know that is that is my
responsibility and I took responsibility
for having done that.
You took responsibility. You went to
Boris. You said you know you'd
apologized to him and he considered the
matter closed and then
that's kind of where people thought it
had been left off. But then I think the
pre the media noise and the pressure
built and eventually the narrative is
that you then resigned after
yeah after 24 48 hours. It wasn't really
after the um wasn't really the press. It
was that, you know, some people I really
respect got in contact and told me about
things that they had been not able to do
like what
um like you know seeing dying relatives
and
you know even though it you know and and
I and I realized that it was it was
unsustainable.
Would you class that as the the worst
time of your life?
Being health secretary is not nearly as
difficult as worrying about your
children in a very public divorce.
Um,
undoubtedly this, you know, going
through that is undoubtedly the hardest
thing I've ever done by a long, long
way.
And as as you go forward on that
particular situation, what's your like
strategy? Because you've come from a
home where your parents weren't they
they they'd broken up, right? So what's
your what's your strategy going forward
now to
to try to mend to try to be kind to try
to
to try to um
um
to try to make you know on the fact
obviously try to make things better.
Um, and then on the professional side,
you know, I've got a other things I'm
interested in. I actually don't miss the
job as much as I expected, right? I'm I
actually I I'm really enjoying the
freedom of being on the back benches on
the professional side. And um I'm I'm,
you know, I'm I'm absolutely, you know,
um
I'm absolutely in love with Gina. And
that that helps a bit.
a lot of the um since you've departed
the front the front bench there's uh I
mean now there's there's a lot of party
gate stuff going on and yeah it's kind
of almost reminiscent of your situation
because the the claim level the
government is that there was a
contradiction there was all these
parties going on into 10 10 Downing
Street sounds like it was bit of a
nightclub while the rest of the nation
is was were locked down and obeying the
rules
you've not really been brought into that
as much
I wasn't invited
you weren't invited But what's your
what's your take on that? What's your
because I'm sure you get asked about
this.
Well, that's obviously very difficult.
Um, but I do think you've got to look at
the big picture of, you know, we're
coming out of the pandemic now and
that's in part in large part because of
the the big calls.
But you resigned when when you had the I
I'll be honest, you had the decency to
say, "Right, I have been a contradiction
here and I've let people down." So, you
resigned. But
yeah, but you know the prime minister
has so many other things on his plate as
well, right? He's got Russia, Crimeir,
and he's got uh the um you know, getting
out of the pandemic. That was a big
call, especially the response to
Omicron, getting that right
and coming through first. So, he's got
all these other big things on his plate.
What do you make of um I don't really
have much to talk about on this
particular topic, but this all this
Dominic Cumins stuff. He's become a very
interesting character, bit of a
whistleblower, exposer type. And you
know, you're you've been supportive of
Boris Johnson pretty much the whole way,
even as you say with the party gate
stuff. You said, "We need to look at the
bigger picture." But he released some
text messages that apparently are very
critical of you where Boris said that
you you [__] up ventilators and that
you're totally [__] hopeless.
Yeah. But remember at that time it
subsequently transcribed that Dominic
Cummings was trying to get me fired. And
if you look at those text exchanges,
they're like a dire tribe against what I
was up to,
right?
And um that didn't actually reflect what
was going on. So, you know, the the
Boris has apologized for uh the way that
came over, but actually if you um and
for you know, for sending those
messages, but actually if you look at it
in context, the context is this guy was
trying to get me fired. He sent a load
of um aggressive messages to the prime
minister. the prime minister responded
as he did in a private setting never
expecting that to become public. So um
I'm completely you know what what you
know there are there are there are
people who really want to fix things and
improve things in life and um uh and uh
I'd rather be that type of person.
Speaking of fixing things, yeah, one of
the things you're really focused on
fixing at the moment, and I've seen you
talk about this in Parliament and in
several other places in a lot of the
interviews you're doing in Twitter, is
this issue of dyslexia in our country.
Tell me why you you alluded to it
earlier why this is personal to you. So,
so I was only identified as dyslexic at
university and I know despite really
good teachers, it would have been so
much easier for me because before I was
identified, I just thought I was stupid
and and bad at English. And some people
say you shouldn't identify, you know,
you shouldn't tell dyslexic kids they're
dyslexic because then they'll be
labeled. But I labeled myself as as as
as useless with words and kids do that.
But still today only one in five
children are identified at school. And I
think this is ridiculous especially in a
world where you can have online
assessments that can't then they can't
give you the formal diagnosis but they
can give you the data that says this
person's this child's highly unlikely to
highly likely to be dyslexic. So I'm
campaigning for that. And in a way it's
one of these things that you know now
that I've got I can choose how I spend
my time as a backbencher. This is
something I really care about. I never
got round to doing it in government. I
actually had assembled a little team to
push on this in the department for
health after the election before but
those people got moved on to have to
deal with the pandemic. So for me this
is unfinished business and for the you
know hundreds of thousands of dyslexic
kids out there. If I can show them, if I
can show just one of them that you can
you can succeed as a dyslexic person and
you can make it so long as you get the
support you need, as long as you get,
you know, you get identified um then
then that will have been worth it. So it
really really matters to me and I I'm
sure we can make loads of progress.
when you when we talked about you having
this conversation with me here, there
was I remember you saying there was
things that had been said that you
wanted to kind of have a chance to
address and rebuttal. Do you feel like
you've had a chance to address and
rebuttal those things?
Yeah, I have. Um I feel like, you know,
because we've have been able to have a
long conversation, you know, there's a
few of those um a few things I've been
able to explain explain the thinking
behind. Um but I also hope that we can
have a proper um debate about how this
is how the pandemic side is dealt with
properly in the future and um we can
learn learn the lessons as best we can
and I think that's important.
Every guest in this podcast you be aware
of this tradition leaves a question in
the diary of a CEO and I don't read it
and I swear on my I swear on all my
family that I that I don't read it until
I open the book. So, forgive me if I
takes me some time to read the
handwriting. Okay, here we go. So, the
last guest on the Driver podcast left
this question for you.
If you were lying on your deathbed, what
three things would you want to have
achieved in life?
Oh, well, that's great. Three things.
Three things you would want to have
achieved in your life.
Pretty ambitious. Um, the number one is
I want my children to be happy and
and and have fulfilling lives. That is
that is
Undoubtedly number one. The second is
that I will have want I want to have a
happy and loving and fulfilling um life
and relationship,
you know, for the rest of my days
on just because of what's happened with
Gina. Gina's actually here today. It's
worth saying. Yeah, that's okay to say
that.
Um because of what's happened, I'm
guessing it's made
it's the scrutiny around because
relationships are hard already.
Yeah. But the the context and the
scrutiny around that
what's happened must I can't make it
easier
we've been through a lot together um and
you know that's the that's the joyous
bit that's the easy bit
there's a lot of you know there's a lot
of very difficult things that I have to
deal with um you know and um
having fallen in love with Gina is the
that's the easy
And the third one
and the third one um I hope that I hope
to have I mean it's sort of both it's so
obvious um but it and I'm going to put
some I'm going to try to answer it more
specifically. Um I hope to have
improved the country that I love. Um and
you know if for instance that is making
sure that every single dyslexic child
gets both the the capability
to read and write and um be effective
and the self-esteem that comes with that
then that would be that would be
wonderful and I'm lucky to have a
platform
in parliament um and through the fact
that I'm fairly well known to be able to
to um to try to affect change and that's
what I want to do.
Thank you. Thank you for both your time
because I know it's in tremendous
demand, but also thank you for choosing
to have this conversation here. These
conversations aren't easy, so it's often
easy to easier to avoid them. And you
know, we talked about the importance of
emotion and relatability in politics.
So, I want to thank you for taking the
time to have a conversation where you
didn't set any restrictions on me, my
line of questioning at all, and you let
me ask the questions, which as a quite
naive person who isn't polit um really
political um would have. And I think
that's a credit to you, and I I I thank
you for that. And um yeah,
well, thanks for giving me the chance. I
don't think you're naive at all. You're
self- knowing, and you know, that's the
most important thing to know.
Well, thank you, man.
Heat. Heat. N.
Heat. Heat.
[Music]